## **Introduction**
#### All modern devices that have a visual interface have an operating system that helps the user experience the device in a way that makes sense to them, without having extensive computer knowledge. The way operating systems look and function has evolved over the years, older phone started with only the necessary features like calling and storing phone numbers, so there was no need for a flashy software design, nor were there the resources. As phones became more powerful, the more features are added, and the better the operating systems can look.
#### In this text, I will explain the historical evolution and major developments through Nokia’s height of popularity, when mobile phones were very limited in their features, to a point just before the creation of the iPhone, where their empire came crashing down.

## **Historical Evolution**
#### The original Nokia mobile phones from the 90s, like the Nokia 101 (1992), were built on very primitive operating systems, the likes of which you would see on a cheap calculator. They had little functionality past letting you input/call phone numbers, displaying the number you typed, and showing the battery level. It only boasted a 1G Cellular Network Connectivity, which led to poor connectivity in several areas, and didn’t allow for much past voice communication.
#### Nokia made many iterations of this base 101, like the 1011, which had 2G connectivity and was mass produced, Nokia 2010, which could see call history up to 10 calls ago, could receive and send messages and was more affordable than previous models. The 21XX Series (Nokia 2110-2170) all showed slight iterations to connectivity and interface. Despite the minor improvements to each model’s interface, from the 101 to up until the late 2100 series in mid-1996, they all had pretty much the same OS.
#### That was until the Nokia 8810 in 1996, which was Nokia’s first proper “Premium Phone” (They had premium PDAs in the past with phone features, though they didn’t look like phones, and their older phones were sold for exorbitant prices, though it was average for mobile phones to cost that much back then), and ran the “Series 20” User Interface. This phone had applications like a calculator, a calendar and a currency converter, and even featured games like snake. The framework for this phone’s OS would go onto be used in the consumer grade Nokia 3310, which is one of the most popular and well-known phones released by Nokia. The 3310 would allow for customisation to screensavers using a limited in-built paint program, and the transfer of custom ringtones from a desktop computer.
#### Nokia would release the 8310 in 2001, which was their first phone to use the new Series 30 operating system, a system which at the time resembled the Series 20 phones of past years, with added features like DCT4 and GPRS, which would allow for better connectivity and accessibility to FM radio.
#### In 2002, when the Series 30 operating system released, but was still in development, the Nokia 7210 would come with the Series 40 operating system, which was a giant leap forward in terms of software, usability, hardware and telecommunications.  It had an impressive GUI with applications listed in a grid formation (a design choice still used today). This phone would be the first to use a coloured display, as opposed to the calculator-like monochrome LCD display of before, and would now resemble that of a Game Boy Advance. Because of the phone’s GRPS connectivity, it could access a limited part of the internet. The phone had Java Platform 2 Micro Edition support, allowing for the installation of more complex Java applications, and because of its GRPS connectivity, it could download and install java applications through the internet. The phone had a photo gallery, which you could put photos or videos onto by using a computer, or using a camera attachment. Messaging was greatly improved, and you could now send pictures to people through MMS. This would lay the foundation for phones to come.
#### After the release of the 7210 and Series 40, Nokia decided to go back to the Series 30 in 2004 with the Nokia 2600, which like the previous Series 30 phones, was limited in its capabilities in comparison to the Series 40, but shared some characteristics, like the coloured display and EMS (Which allows for sending spreadsheets, like XML files). Apart from that the phone performed mostly the same as any older Series 30 or newer Series 20 phones.
#### There wouldn’t be too much innovation from Nokia’s end in terms of their phones from 2004 onwards, and their almost monopoly over the mobile phone industry would come to an end when Apple released the iPhone, redefining what it meant to own a mobile phone. Nokia would go into smartphone development but wouldn’t find quite the success as they used to have in their peak, especially facing goliaths like Apple. 

## **Viewpoint – Releasing 2 phones per year VS Brute forcing phone releases**
#### Nokia’s business model was to flood the market with differently priced and goal-oriented phones, so whatever your needs were, there was probably a Nokia for you. This opposes iPhone’s business model, which revolves about scheduled releases of 2 or more phones per year, where each product reaches a wide demographic of people, so unless you require a really specific need met, you’re probably best going for the one within your price bracket. Both business models worked, though there is a reason as to why companies stick with iPhone’s model as opposed to Nokia’s model, and so I will cover the pros and cons for each model
### Nokia’s Business Model
#### Nokia back at their height in the 90s and early 00s, released several phones throughout the course of each year, each phone being targeted at a different consumer, with designs and features to reflect their demographic. The naming scheme goes as follows: 
#### **- 1xxx Ultrabasic Phones:** Stripped down features, down the bare essentials (Phone calls, Messaging, Call Records, Monochrome Display)
#### **-	2xxx Basic Phones:** Phones that have more features than the 1xxx series (Bluetooth, Colour Displays)
#### **- 3xxx Mid-range “Expression”:** Phones designed for the youth market, with an emphasis on attractive designs and flashy colours
#### **- 5xxx Mid-range “Active”:** Phones with a rugged design and music features, designed for an outdoors lifestyle
#### **- 6xxx Business Phones:** Phones built with features fit for business people, with the newest operating systems of the time and experimental designs (Candybar, Slide, Clamshell). Designed to be functional and stylish, yet still be affordable.
#### **- 7xxx Fashion and experimental phones:** Phones built for fashion, and made to test features like operating systems and modules like cameras, before implementing into other Nokia phone lines
#### **- 8xxx Premium Phones:** Phones built with ergonomics and design in mind, but with similar internals to other models
#### **- 9xxx Communicator Series:** The highest end of Nokia phone, packed with the most up-to-date features
#### An obvious flaw with having so many mobile phone series is the choice paralysis that would come with so many options of phone with very minor or in some cases major differences. Despite the amount of available Nokia phones at any one time, people would tend to gravitate to the ones tried and tested by their peers, resulting in phones like the Nokia 3310 and 2600 becoming the most popular for each of their respective times.
#### It is important to keep in mind the differences in times that Nokia phones were released in, in comparison to iPhones. Back then it wasn’t seen as a necessity to have the newest and best performing phone, but as a luxury, so people would stick with the device which met their needs and no more. Nowadays most phones come with the same kinds of features, and you could make do with a lower end phone, but you are put through trial and tribulation to work with a lower-end phone’s limitations, like speed, storage, camera quality, network speed and screen size. Back then, if your phone had text messaging, you were ahead of the curve.

#### Apple’s business model with the iPhone learned from Nokia’s mistakes, realising that bigger technological jumps spaced out among slower device releases would benefit everyone in the long run, as everyone would be on the same page in terms of what their phone could do. Apple’s business model was as follows:
#### iPhone: Releasing in June of 2007, providing Apple’s most up-to-date innovations in mobile computing as of the time, in the iPhone OS 1.0, but would allow for upgrades until iPhone OS 3.1.3.
#### - iPhone 3G: Releasing one year and one month after the previous model, and releasing with iPhone OS 2.0, but allowing for upgrades until iOS 4.2.1. Despite the naming scheme having 3 in it, that solely refers to its connectivity to 3G networks, as this is the second iPhone released.
#### - iPhone 3GS: Releasing 11 months after the previous model, and releasing with iPhone OS 3.0, but allowing for upgrades until iOS 6.1.6. The naming scheme of this phone is similar to the previous 3G, though the S in 3GS stand for speed, displaying its faster internet speeds than the previous phone, also fitting since this is the third iPhone released.
#### - iPhone 4: Releasing one year after the previous model, and releasing with iOS 4.0 (shortened to match Apple’s naming scheme for products), but allowing for upgrades until iOS 7.1.2. This phone’s name solely reflects that it is the fourth iPhone.
#### - iPhone 4s: Releasing one year after the previous model, and releasing with iOS 5.0, but allowing for upgrades until iOS 7.1.2. The S in 4s is not specifically defined, though is thought to stand for “Siri”, a virtual assistant added with the release of this phone.
#### - iPhone 5: Releasing one year after the previous model, and releasing with iOS 6.0, but allowing for upgrades until iOS 10.3. Follows same naming scheme as the iPhone 4.
#### - iPhone 5c: Releasing one year after the previous model, and releasing with iOS 7.0, but allowing for upgrades until iOS 10.3.3. The C stands for Colour, since the biggest difference between this and the original was the backplate using coloured polycarbonate (Plastic) instead of aluminium. The specifications are largely the same as the iPhone 5, so not many consumers found this a worthwhile purchase.
#### - iPhone 5s: Releasing on the same day as the iPhone 5s, and releasing with iOS 7.0, but allowing for upgrades until iOS 12.5.7. The S in 5s, similar to the 4s, is not defined, but is thought to represent “Security”, for the addition of Touch ID.	
#### From the iPhone 5s onward, Apple would continue with this kind of scheme for releasing their phones, with a main release coming out, a slightly better or worse version of that phone a year later and moving onto the next main phone release. This scheme worked well for Apple because the line between phone generations was clearly set, allowing for users to know exactly what they would get if they decided to buy any version of the iPhone, and price was based off how old the device was, and how it’s internals compare to the newest phone. People trusted this scheme of phone releases, as opposed to Nokia’s, who would release a bunch of phones at random which were hard to put a date on, or to compare to other phones, because of the naming scheme. 
#### This shows that Apple’s method of releasing their iPhones was better received than Nokia’s phone releases of the past, because they improve customer awareness, and are more recognisable. 

## **Ethical Issues**
#### Nokia’s release method was not sustainable, because the volume of phones released in such a short time would mean that most of those phones wouldn’t see much purchase past the tens of thousands, unless if they were particularly noteworthy. This would result in many phones being created and not sold, creating electronic waste, which is terrible for the environment.
#### The solution to this is to follow a better release method, where phones are developed and created to meet demand, as opposed to being created and hoping a market will find its way to the phone. This happens to be exactly the kind of method that Apple uses with its iPhone.

## **Conclusion**
#### Nokia’s time developing in the mobile phone space was massively important in terms of how we came to the point we’re at now. Their innovation in mobile computing technologies was part of the reason why we have smartphones now, and it’s great to look back and see how ahead of the times they were. Unfortunately, they weren’t able to survive the current tech landscape, and will definitely not be able to come back from their failures, but their impact will never be forgotten. 


